[THEME MUSIC]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
"Gaiam Inspirations."
And today, we're going
to go on a journey
of transformational hypnosis
with master teacher and trainer
Christopher Howard.
He's also the CEO of
Rock House Global.
And according to Chris,
one of the biggest mistakes
that people make
about hypnosis is
that they think
you lose control,
and that's actually the
furthest thing from the truth.
All hypnosis is self-hypnosis,
and Chris is here
as a guide to take us on a
journey of learning our fullest
sense of power and self-control.
So welcome.
Thank you for being here.
>>CHRIS HOWARD: Wow!
That was quite the introduction.
I like that, too.
You got it.
I mean, you got it spot on.
>>LISA: So what
is the difference
between transformational
hypnosis
and the traditional
hypnosis that we see,
maybe the stage shows
in Vegas type of thing?
>>HOWARD: Right.
Essentially, it's
the same thing.
Because what it's about,
it's about getting out
of your own way and
revealing potential
that-- potential the potential
that you didn't know you had.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LISA: So in a stage
show, and a lot of people
will see in stage
shows on TV or they've
gone to Vegas, like you say.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>HOWARD: And somebody's told
you are now Michael Jackson
and they come on out,
oh, and they dance.
And it's like, was
that always within them
to do that and
the answer is yes.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>HOWARD: You know, that
talent was always there.
But most people
play small in life.
Most people get
in their own way.
And when we can get
out of our own way,
there's nothing that
we can't accomplish.
So whether we're doing it for
entertainment purposes on stage
or we're doing it
just in our own life,
essentially it's the same thing.
We're using the power of our
imagination to fuel a change
and to get out of our own way.
>>LISA: So what are some
examples of self-hypnosis?
Like how do we just
go into hypnotic gazes
throughout the day?
We do this all the time, right?
>>HOWARD: We do it all
the time, but not only
do we do it all the time
throughout the day from-- we
could say we go into a trance,
like a driving trance where
you're driving your
car and you wonder
how you got in your driveway.
>>LISA: Right.
It happens to me all the time.
Yes.
>>HOWARD: Or you're
in the elevator
and they even have an induction
that goes 10, nine, eight,
and then you walk
off and you realize
you're on the
wrong floor, right?
I think we've all--
>>LISA: Interesting, yes.
>>LISA: You've never
done that have you?
>>LISA: Yes, I have.
Of course, yes.
Yes.
>>LISA: So we're
in and out of what
one might call trance
states all the time.
But, for me, all of
life is a trance state.
And the reason why I say that
is because there's a phrase that
was-- you know, the first
time I heard it was in 1933.
I wasn't there personally.
>>LISA: I hope not.
Yes.
>>HOWARD: A guy by the
name of Alfred Korzybski
wrote a book called
"Science and Sanity."
And in that book--
it's all about sanity.
And inside that book, he
says that the map is not
the territory.
Even the best map of California
built full to scale still
wouldn't be California.
>>LISA: Hm.
Right.
>>HOWARD: And you wouldn't
go to the restaurant
and eat the menu.
The menu represents the food.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: And our
thoughts and our model
of the world, our unique
way of looking at the world,
is an internal representation.
So we experience the world
inside our head, right?
And people mistake the map
for being the territory
all the time.
And that's the problem.
So when we think about life--
and when I say the map,
I'm talking about
our internal thoughts
that we have inside our mind.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: But also the
basis of our personality,
you know, our
values, our beliefs,
our attitudes about life
that we've been programmed
and conditioned to
accept over time.
And your programming
is completely
different than the programming
of Richard Branson or Jimmy
Buffett.
Now, I didn't say Warren
Buffett, I said Jimmy.
>>LISA: OK.
Right.
>>HOWARD: It's
different programming.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HOWARD: Reality is subjective.
And the life that we
create is a result
of who we are, what we
project out onto the world.
And so if we want to change
the results in our life,
we can get inside and we
can change the programming.
But people mistake their
programming for being reality.
So we can enrich it.
We can change it.
And that's a trance
state, when they
believe what their
thoughts to be real.
>>LISA: So someone like a
Richard Branson's internal map
of the world is different than
my internal map of the world,
because I don't--
>>HOWARD: Sure, yeah.
>>LISA: -own Virgin
everything, right?
>>HOWARD: Virgin
everything, yeah.
>>LISA: So, you know, I'm
not the multi-billion dollar
brand he is.
He has a different role.
>>HOWARD: You're getting close.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: All right.
All right.
>>LISA: But if I were
to be into that-- like,
want to create
something like that,
I would need to be
modeling him and looking
at life from that map?
>>HOWARD: Well, you can
think about it that way.
>>LISA: Or that territory?
>>HOWARD: It's like we each
have our own internal map.
There's a very
famous hypnotist, he
was actually a classically
trained psychiatrist,
by the name of Dr.
Milton Erickson who
said that each of us has a
unique model of the world
that's as unique
as our thumbprint.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: So we have a unique
way of looking at the world,
expecting the world to show up.
A unique way of
operating in the world.
Unique strategies,
unique tactics
that we use that have literally
been programmed and conditioned
into the neurology.
So when we think of
our habits, our habits
are actualized neural pathways.
They're an order and
sequence of neurons
that fire off, like a
finely grooved road.
And when you have the tools
of-- we call it hypnosis,
but really it's the faculty
of your imagination.
So Einstein said imagination is
more important than knowledge.
When you have the
tools of hypnosis,
you can use your imagination
to pave new neural pathways
for change.
And if you have great models--
you take a Richard Branson,
you could take somebody
who's producing
extraordinary results,
you can look at that
and you can repave and
re-pattern your own neurology
so that change becomes as simple
as taking a shortcut to work.
Once you find it, you
know how to take it.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
That's-- I've modeled Oprah for
a long time and I've loved what
she's done in the world.
>>HOWARD: And Oprah
modeled before her,
Oprah Winfrey said that before
she-- her first time on camera,
the first time she did
an interview, she said
she had no clue what to
do, so she sat the way
Barbara Walters sat, she
asked questions the way
Barbara Walters asked questions.
>>LISA: That's a
good model, as well.
Absolutely.
>>HOWARD: Yes.
And Phil Donahue, she
modeled Phil Donahue.
So we all do that.
We have those role models that
we pattern ourselves after
and they give us maps
for how to behave.
But when we engage the
function of the imagination
and we really take ourselves
on journeys of imagination--
it was a man by the name of
Neville, Neville Goddard.
And I know you know
who Neville is.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: Beautiful writer.
But he said that the
future will be no different
than the imaginal
activities of man,
because it's the imaginal
activities of man that
create both our
present and our future.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>HOWARD: And so, hypnosis is--
>>LISA: Got it.
>>HOWARD: -really
about learning how
to take charge of
your imagination
to create whatever
future you want.
>>LISA: OK, so now,
Erickson, as you mentioned,
there's a term that you've
taught me called Ericksonian
hypnosis where you can actually
pace and lead people through
a conversation--
>>HOWARD: Right.
>>LISA: -into their
desired outcome, right?
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
Absolutely.
So--
>>LISA: Go ahead.
>>HOWARD: So you've got
traditional hypnosis
where you might-- you know, when
most people think of hypnosis,
they think of direct
authoritarianism.
Direct authoritarian
is where you
say sit back, relax,
go into a trance.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: Now
we've also got-- we
have different
styles of hypnosis.
Erickson was very
conversational and he
was very-- one of the things
that Erickson said was he said,
I think that a
client ought to be
able to go into a
trance in any way
that he or she chooses
to go into a trance,
and they ought to be able
to follow my suggestions
in any way that
he or she chooses
to follow my suggestions,
which is a permissive--
and it's like, if you
think about what's
presupposed underneath that
is they're going in a trance
and they're following
suggestions.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HOWARD: Right.
So it's a permissive
style of hypnosis.
But he was a kind man
with a-- you know,
he saw everybody as-- he thought
that everybody should have
a white house with
a white picket fence
and two kids and a dog.
And he helped people to
have that perfect life
as he envisioned it,
or as they obviously
had to have their
own input, right.
And he would help
them to do that.
So he was coming from
a really good place,
but he was a magician of change.
And he'd do it linguistically.
Like you'd have a
conversation with him--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>HOWARD: -and you'd just
find yourself changing.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>HOWARD: That was
the magic of Erickson.
Like if you went to see
Erickson for smoking cessation,
to stop smoking,
he might not ever
talk about cigarettes directly.
He might tell you about a
story about a dog on a bluff
with a bone in its
mouth that wanted
to drink the cool
fresh water in a dish,
but it couldn't get to
the water because it
didn't want to let
go of the bone.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>HOWARD: And then you find
yourself walking outside
and thinking about how
bad the therapy was
because the guy didn't
mention cigarettes,
and you'd forget to
do the old problem.
You'd forget to smoke.
It would be a trigger point.
So--
>>LISA: Ah,
brilliant, brilliant.
>>HOWARD: Magician of change.
>>LISA: You studied
him for a long time.
>>HOWARD: Studied Erickson.
I study a lot of different types
of tools for transformation.
But ultimately, for me, it all
comes back to-- at some level,
it does come back to hypnosis.
And we're constantly using
hypnosis in our own life
anyway.
You know, it's like if somebody
doesn't stay on a diet,
it's because their
imagination kicks in
about how great the chocolate
cake's going to taste.
>>LISA: Right.
So that's a self-hypnosis
in the wrong direction.
>>HOWARD: Exactly.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LISA: But can we take our--
say we want to stay on a diet
and we would look at that
picture of the bikini body
that we put up on
our refrigerator.
>>HOWARD: That's what I do.
I look at the bikini body
and I say, I want it.
That's how I want to look.
I'm sorry.
>>LISA: So you put
in the refrigerator,
but I open it and still
reach for whatever
is in there that isn't going
to give you the bikini body.
>>HOWARD: You reached
right past the bikini body?
>>LISA: I did.
>>HOWARD: Oh, my God.
What are you doing?
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: But that obviously
didn't work for me.
>>HOWARD: Right.
>>LISA: So--
>>HOWARD: I mean, it's like,
did it not work for you
or did you not work it?
Because there's always--
whenever-- whenever change--
whenever we're talking about
change and transformation,
there's two things that
play-- interweave together.
We've got willpower and
we've got imagination.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
Yes.
>>HOWARD: So like I tell
people with smoking,
because I just finished a
class out here in Los Angeles.
We had 600 people in
the class, big class,
they were all becoming certified
in transformational hypnosis.
>>LISA: Nice.
>>HOWARD: Yeah,
it was very cool.
It was good fun.
And when we did the class,
one of the things I say
is that whenever willpower and
imagination are in conflict,
imagination will always win.
Right?
Because-- and that's how it is.
If you don't stay
in the relationship
it's because you're
imagining that the grass is
greener on the other side.
All right?
Perhaps.
>>LISA: Or if you don't have
a big enough imagination
around what the body could look
like, the imagination of how
the cake will make
you feel is bigger.
Is that what you're saying?
>>HOWARD: Well, that's what
happened in your case, right?
Because either your
willpower wasn't in check
where you weren't
being an participate
in the-- active
participant in the change.
You were just looking
at the-- you're
looking at the body
going, yeah, I'd like that
but I want that
chocolate cake more.
Or-- so the willpower's
is not in check there.
Or your imagination is
bigger-- you perceive
there to be a bigger benefit
from the cake in the moment.
And there's ways that
you can change that.
>>LISA: The secondary
gain was comfort.
>>HOWARD: The emotional
benefit, right.
>>LISA: So then I could go
after, what, the comfort
and how that would
feel when I really
have the diet that I want.
>>HOWARD: Right.
Or how great will you feel
that emotional benefit when you
really-- when you're
lean and trim and--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HOWARD: -and you
get that bikini body.
And it sounds-- it's simpler--
you know, people go easier
said than done, right?
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOWARD: Because in the moment
we have emotional triggers that
trigger responses--
>>LISA: There's all that.
>>HOWARD: -whether it be eating
to anesthetize our emotions
or it be spending too
much or watching too much
TV or drinking or drugs
or whatever people
do to anesthetize
their emotions and not
deal with the things at hand.
But that's their imagination
getting the best of them
as well.
And I'm not preaching
at anybody because I've
been in all those
same positions.
We all are.
This is life.
We're human beings.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
But you happen to have some-- a
tool or skill set here that can
really help guide people
out of those triggers--
>>HOWARD: Yeah, absolutely.
>>LISA: -which is great.
>>HOWARD: And once again,
I've had to guide myself out
of my own triggers and I've
had to continually do that
throughout life, because life is
a process of having challenges.
But when we got great tools,
we are more well-equipped
and more ready to deal
with those things.
>>LISA: So can you give
us an example of what--
some simple examples of how we
could use hypnosis in our life?
Like, something that shows
us that we're good at it?
>>HOWARD: I mean,
it's across the board,
because-- and by the
way, the question really
becomes when do we not
use hypnosis in our life?
We are constantly
using-- and this
is what I look to drill
into people's heads
is that there's never a moment
that you're not hypnotized.
Why?
Because you're mistaking
the map for the territory.
You're mistaking your model
of the world, your beliefs,
your values as being real.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
And it's just a
unique individual way
of looking at the world,
but it's not real.
Reality is subjective.
We each have our own reality.
All right, so we're mistaking
our model of the world
for being real, so we're
constantly hypnotized anyway.
And then the thoughts
that we have either
hypnotize us to produce
extraordinary results
or to produce ordinary results
or below average results.
So I kind of joke
with people sometimes,
I say when you think about going
to the gym and working out,
you know, are you your
own best coach mentally?
Are you going, I'm going to gym.
You're an athlete.
You're a warrior.
You enjoy this.
You love working out.
You enjoy it.
You love eating right.
You eat healthy.
Imagine yourself right
now lean and trim.
You are an athlete.
You're a warrior and
you love to workout.
You wake up early
and it feels good.
And you hear the voice-- is that
the dialogue that's going on
inside?
Are those the pictures
that are going on inside?
Or is it like, well, you
wake up in the morning
and your alarm clock goes off.
Well, sleep's an important
part of health, too.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
Absolutely.
>>HOWARD: It's your thoughts.
It's your thoughts.
So it comes down to our
thoughts govern our reality.
It's the same thing that
Napoleon Hill was saying back
in "Think and Grow Rich."
It's the same thing
then Rhonda Byrne
was saying in "The Secret."
It's the same thing, but
very few people really
understand how do you
take charge of that?
And here's where hypnosis
comes into the picture
because we've all
heard that we only
use 10% percent of our mind,
but neurobiologists these days
are saying that
it's only about 5%
of who we are that one would
consider to be conscious.
So 95% of who we are
would be unconscious.
That's the body mind.
The part of you that beats
your heart, that blinks you,
that circulate your
lymph, that breathes you.
>>LISA: 95%?
>>HOWARD: 95%.
So people go out and they
say, yeah, I read the book
or I saw the DVD and I'm
using the Law of Attraction,
for example, which is--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HOWARD: -it's
absolutely- it's gospel;
however, they're doing it
with 5% of who they are.
>>LISA: 5% isn't enough.
>>HOWARD: 5% is
not enough, right?
>>LISA: No.
That's not enough
inertia there at all.
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
So it's like where's
the other 95% going?
And if you have a goal
and you set a goal
that you want to
make more money,
but if at the
unconscious level you've
got anger toward
people who make money
or you've got guilt
about making money,
like you feel at some level it's
not spiritual to make money.
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOWARD: Or you have fear about
what making money would mean
or false associations like money
is evil or money and happiness
don't go hand in hand--
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOWARD: -then that past
programming and conditioning
is going to override any
conscious goal that you
might have.
And if you go-- it's the
same with relationships.
You know, if you have a
goal to have a relationship
and you say, boy, I want to
have that great relationship.
But if at the
unconscious level you
have anger toward
the opposite sex,
you've got guilt from
past relationships, fear
of abandonment,
fear of intimacy,
or even both where it's
like don't come too close
but don't go away.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>HOWARD: Those
push-pull conflicts
stop people dead
in their tracks.
>>LISA: So can we
find a way to know
if we are suggestible
enough for hypnosis?
Does everybody get-- is able--
they're able to get hypnotized
or is there a way that
we could figure that out?
>>HOWARD: It's an
interesting question,
if we're suggestible
enough for hypnosis.
There was a couple
called the Hilgards that
did some research
way back in the day.
That means a long time ago.
And what they did was they
took people off the street
and they played a
phonograph record,
and they wanted to see
how many people would
go into trance by
simply listening
to the photographic record.
And they found that a certain
percent of people would go
into a light hypnotic
trance, a certain percent--
I think it was 20%
into a light trance,
60% into a medium trance,
another 20% into a heavier--
a deep state of trance--
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: -by simply
listening to the record.
But the problem with
the Hilgard's research
was that they took one important
part out of the equation, which
was the teacher of the hypnosis.
And we say that all
hypnosis is about learning
how to go into hypnosis.
So anybody can be taught trance.
Anybody can be taught
to utilize the power
of their unconscious mind.
Because when you align
your conscious intentions--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: -with your
unconscious resources,
that's where you
get 100% of yourself
moving toward your goals.
>>LISA: Nice.
>>HOWARD: Physically,
emotionally,
spiritually, financially.
If you want to make
more money, if you
want to have better
relationships.
>>LISA: So you have
to know your goals.
>>HOWARD: Well, you
have to know your goals,
you have to get clear, so that's
why we say that intention--
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: -is the most
important aspect of hypnosis.
And back to your
original question,
what's the difference between
stage and therapeutic hypnosis
would be the intention.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: Stage hypnosis, the
intention is to entertain.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>HOWARD: People follow
suggestions for that.
Therapeutic hypnosis, it
could be to make more money,
could be to improve
your relationships--
>>LISA: Transform.
>>HOWARD: -transform
in some way.
>>LISA: In any way.
>>HOWARD: And so
when you-- the person
who's the teacher-- so as a
teacher of hypnosis, what you
do is you teach people
how to access the deepest
resources of their
unconscious mind
so that they have 100%
control over their own life.
Because when you can give your
body, your unconscious mind,
the suggestion to shut
off pain and it does--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>HOWARD: -that's power.
>>LISA: Yes.
Or to stop smoking,
which could kill you.
And there's so much.
>>HOWARD: Or to fall in
love with making cold calls,
and it does.
I always-- I tell
people, I say, if you
fell in love with working
out and eating right,
do you think you'd be
10 times healthier?
>>LISA: Yes, of course.
Because-- yes, love is
a very powerful feeling.
>>HOWARD: It's a
powerful emotion.
If you fell in love with
marketing and advertising
your business and
doing sales, would you
be 10 times more
successful financially--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: -or more?
>>HOWARD: If you fell in love
with fulfilling your partner,
would have a better
relationship, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: So-- and
all of these things
are a function of
the imagination
and all of these things
can be done with hypnosis.
And, as a matter of
fact, I'd go so far
as to say they are already
being done with hypnosis,
just probably not so well.
>>LISA: In-- or in the
opposite direction.
>>HOWARD: In the
>>LISA: A lot of
marketing and sales
are all hypnosis, basically.
I mean, it's the way
that you're shown
that you'll have this
body if you buy this.
>>HOWARD: Imagine
this body, buy this.
I mean, Martin
Luther King, Jr, one
of the best hypnotists of
all time one could say.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>HOWARD: I have a dream.
He took people from a state, an
emotional state of resignation
to a state of inspiration, and
they changed their behaviors
and went out and changed
the face of a nation.
Through the dream,
through the imagery
that he was able to
paint for people,
he was able to spark
that and that's really
how hypnosis works.
It's about creating
thoughts in the mind that
are so real that we generate
emotions in our body.
And an emotion-- emotion is
like, it's behind all motion.
It's the--
>>LISA: Energy in motion.
>>HOWARD: Energy in motion.
It's what creates our behavioral
states or our behaviors.
And our behaviors ultimately
determine our outcomes.
>>LISA: So there's something
fun that you do and we're going
to have someone on that's
going to come on later
and you're going to actually
work with this person--
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
>>LISA: -to show what it means
to go into a hypnotic state.
>>HOWARD: We can do that, yes.
>>LISA: And we're going to show
a few videos around that, too.
But let's-- you have a
little technique that--
>>HOWARD: Oh, you want to
do a suggestibility test.
>>LISA: Yes, I do,
so play along here.
>>HOWARD: Oh, if you want
to play, you can play along.
I don't even know
where I'm looking.
I'm looking at you.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: OK, so--
>>LISA: Do this at home.
>>HOWARD: Yes, do this at home.
This is one you can try at home.
They always say don't
try this at home--
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOWARD: -but you
can try this at home.
>>LISA: Try this at home.
>>HOWARD: So first
of all, what is this?
You're looking at the finger
vice suggestibility test.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: Right.
And so what a suggestibility
test is a teaching tool
to teach somebody how to
attain the depths of trance
where they could
actually give suggestions
to their unconscious mind
and their unconscious mind
follows through on those.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: And, you know,
the suggestibility test
allows you to build your belief
and expectation in hypnosis.
It does a lot of
other things as well,
but we'll just get
down to business here.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: So what
I want you to do
is clasp your hands
nice and tight together.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: As you clasp your
hands nice and tight together,
then go ahead and
extend your forefingers
so they're touching.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: Now with
your forefingers
touching, in a moment--
not yet, but in a moment,
I'm going to ask you to
open your fingers like this
about an inch apart.
Not yet, but in a moment.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: When you do-- and you
can do this at home, too-- when
you do, I want you to watch
the space between your fingers
and imagine and pretend--
and you have to do this.
I can't do it for you.
You have to fully
imagine and pretend
that I put a vise
clamp on your fingers
and I want you to watch
them draw together.
So go ahead right now
and open your fingers
and watch the space
between them and watch
them coming closer and closer,
tighter and tighter, closer
and closer.
I'm coming closer to you.
Tighter and tighter,
closer and closer.
Allow it to happen.
Want it to happen.
Will it to happen.
Remember, you have to do
this, I can't do it for you.
So bringing all the
way together now,
coming all the way together,
closer and closer, tighter
and tighter.
Tighter and tighter,
closer and closer.
Keep them going now, tighter
and tighter, closer and closer.
[LISA LAUGHS]
OK, the audience--
anybody watching at home,
you can stop, but not Lisa.
Tighter and tighter,
closer and closer.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: Tighter and
tighter, closer and closer.
Tighter and tighter.
Now I want you to try to open
them and find that you can't.
>>LISA: That is so weird!
>>HOWARD: Free movement
returns to your hands.
Yes, right.
>>LISA: That is so weird, yes.
I was looking at you and
a part of me was like, OK,
this is not-- yeah.
There's really the--
>>HOWARD: It's a
teaching tool, yeah.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: It's not that somebody
couldn't force it open and go,
I'm not going to
move my fingers.
Of course they could.
>>LISA: But you said I have
to be willing to do this.
>>HOWARD: And that's
the thing with hypnosis
is that people-- we've got
to change the way that people
think about it.
They think that it's subjugating
your control to somebody else
and that's not the case.
What it is, is it's allowing
you-- it's allowing you--
or you're allowing
yourself to get
rid of what we call
the critical faculty.
The critical faculty
is the part of you
that distinguishes
fantasy from reality.
It's the-- we develop it
right around the age of seven
to nine.
And it's the part of
you that says yeah,
I buy that, yeah,
I believe that,
or no, I don't
believe that, right?
So it's-- if you could imagine
a circle and you've got
your conscious mind and
your unconscious mind,
and it's split in half
with the critical faculty.
Well-- or it would be
split at 5%, right?
Because 95% is unconscious.
And the critical-- so just
think of it as a band.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: So the critical
faculty develops over time,
it's good that we have this.
I remember I grew up
here in Los Angeles,
and when I was four years old,
I jumped off the second story
building of my house because
I thought I could fly.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>HOWARD: And I
realized very quickly
that I couldn't fly, yet.
Right?
>>LISA: OK.
Where did you land?
>>HOWARD: Exactly.
So we develop this
critical faculty,
and it's a good thing to do--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: -that we have
this critical faculty.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>HOWARD: But when you're
a kid, everything's
imagine and pretend.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>HOWARD: And it's as
if-- like my niece,
Brittany, when
she was young, she
had these two imaginary
friends, LaLa and Cuckoo.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: And I remember having
Thanksgiving dinner with her
and I said, are LaLa
and Cuckoo here,
and she said, yes,
they're right there.
And it's as if she saw them--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: -like they
were really right there.
>>LISA: So we have
that imagination.
We have a powerful imagination.
>>HOWARD: We have a
powerful imagination.
And when you see a hypnotic
stage show and somebody says,
see the tennis ball in my hand.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: And they
go, what color is it
and the person says it's green.
And they throw it in the air
and the person watches it--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: Right.
Do they really see a
tennis ball or are they
imagining and pretending so much
so that it's as if they saw it?
>>LISA: So if-- can you use
this type of imagination
and this technique that
you're talking about
to create more
wealth in your life?
>>HOWARD: Absolutely.
And here's the thing,
is because when
you take a technique
like affirmations.
People use affirmations.
But the purpose
of an affirmation
is to change a belief or a
value around a given subject.
Let's say you're
making affirmations
because you want
to make more money.
I bel-- and you're
saying-- basically,
what you're doing is you're
attempting to bludgeon your way
through the critical faculty
to the unconscious mind saying
believe this, believe this--
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOWARD: -believe this, right?
Now I remember running
on the beach when
I was living in El Porto,
California, broke, right?
Saying, you know, God's
wealth is flowing to me.
Money's coming to
me, I know it is.
I know it is.
It's going to come in.
And the problem with
that is that you've
got to chip your way through
this critical faculty
that you've developed over time.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: Now in
hypnosis, what we do
is we remove the
critical faculty
and we send you back to what
we call the imprint period.
The imprint period,
according to sociologist
Dr. Morris Massey
was age 0 to 7.
And that's where the neurology
in your body's firing
off like crazy.
The average baby makes 20
billion synaptic connections
every single day.
That's about five
million a second.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>HOWARD: So the
neurology is firing off.
>>LISA: Wow.
And we think they're
just staring.
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
Yeah, we think
they're just staring,
but they're like a little
sponge soaking things in.
That's my kids are such
exquisite learners.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HOWARD: They literally--
>>LISA: So fast.
>>HOWARD: -soak it in.
They're programmed,
they're conditioned--
they become literally a replica
of their parents at that age.
Then they go out and they
find social models and stuff
like that, like you
did in modeling Oprah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HOWARD: So there is modeling
that happens beyond that,
but in the beginning, you're
like this little sponge.
Well, what we do
in hypnosis is we
get rid of the critical
faculty so that we can send you
back to that stage
where you become
like that little sponge
for selective suggestions.
And that's really important.
In a stage show, it has
to do with intentions,
to entertain or see how
far you can take it.
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOWARD: In
therapeutic hypnosis,
you're going to accept
suggestions that are
in alignment with-- if you're
coming to me to say you want
to make more money--
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOWARD: -I'm
assuming you're going
to accept those
suggestions, once we get rid
of the critical faculty.
You're not going to stand
on your chair and bark
like a dog or
quack like a duck--
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOWARD: -or any of
those types of things,
because that's not why you came.
That's not what
the intention is.
So that's really--
>>LISA: OK, so--
>>HOWARD: -important, too.
>>LISA: I form my intention
before I get to you
and I say this is-- I don't
sit there and say, I am rich.
I sit there and
find out how I would
have various revenues
of income and what
I could change in
terms of my state.
Does that matter?
>>HOWARD: Both of those
things come into play
because your self-concept, I
am, your self-concept determines
everything in your life.
Whether you perceived yourself
to be a rich man, a beggar
man, a poor man or a thief,
that determines everything.
So it all starts
with self-concept.
But saying it is a far
cry from owning it.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>HOWARD: It's like Morpheus
said to Neo in "The Matrix."
There's a difference
between knowing the path
and walking the path.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: And so that-- and
therein lies the challenge.
With traditional
affirmations, we
would be saying it,
attempting to make it
through the critical faculty.
Owning it is a different thing.
And we get rid of
the critical faculty,
just like when my niece
Brittany saw a LaLa-- yes,
they're right there,
LaLa and Cuckoo, that's
when we can own it.
And so Dr. Erickson said
my best hypnotic subject
became my best hypnotic subject
after 300 repeated inductions.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>HOWARD: What that means
is not that they weren't
good the first time, but
the more they did it,
the better they got.
>>LISA: Oh, practice
with anything.
So when you teach
people how to do this,
you teach them how to basically
put people into a trance,
right?
>>HOWARD: I do.
And what's funny is
is that, you know,
I was like-- I
started hypnosis--
I did my first transcendental
meditation class when
I was nine years old, did
my first hypnosis class
when I was 12.
My parents got me
into this stuff
because it was-- it took
my parents-- my mother
and my birth father, I took
their divorce rather hard
when I was five, so they
were looking for ways
to help me deal with things.
And, thank God, I kind of
matured into these techniques.
And when they first
sold hypnosis to me--
because as a kid, you got
to be sold things, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: When they sold
it to me, they said,
this will help you on stage--
because I was in some stage
acting and stuff and
I really loved it--
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOWARD: -and they said, this
will help your performance.
This will help your acting.
I was like, OK, and I
kind of believed it.
But now I get it.
Now I know it.
Now I own it because I
matured into the technologies
and now I've been teaching it.
And hypnosis has all
the weird connotations
or the stigma that goes with it.
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOWARD: But the
reality is, for me,
when you really
start to understand
what it is-- I mean, people
say, oh, I don't do hypnosis,
I just do guided imagery.
Well, essentially
it's the same thing.
>>LISA: Is it the same
thing as visualization?
>>HOWARD: Yeah, but
we've got pictures.
You could be making
pictures of what you want,
but you could have feelings of
poverty or lack in your body.
You could have
negative self talk.
Dr. Deepak Chopra says that
the immune system is constantly
eavesdropping on the internal
dialogue that occurs.
That's our self-talk.
>>LISA: Of course.
That explains disease.
>>HOWARD: Absolutely true.
But we also know that
there's much more going on
than just dialogue.
You're making
pictures in your mind,
you got feelings
in your mind, you
got sounds in your
mind and body,
tastes and smells
to a lesser degree.
I mean they're
there, but they might
have a lesser degree of impact
in terms of what you create.
>>LISA: So hypnosis removes
the critical faculty
that gets in the way with
all those different pictures
and images.
>>HOWARD: Well, what
it does is it allows
you to get-- if we
think of our past,
because we all hear that we're
programmed and conditioned
all the time.
Getting rid of the
critical faculty
allows us to get
into the programming
and change the programming,
change the conditioning,
without having to bludgeon
it into submission after two
or three years of affirmation.
>>LISA: Got it.
Got it.
So it is a fast
track and it is one
of the quickest and lasting
ways to create change.
>>HOWARD: Absolutely.
And the more--
>>LISA: Thus--
>>HOWARD: -you do it,
the better you get.
And that's why-- and when-- the
more you can learn about it.
I've-- you know, your
husband, John, was in the--
>>LISA: Audience, yeah.
>>HOWARD: --the audience
of the program we just did.
And he's a san soo master.
But you know it
better than I do.
Here I am telling you.
But one of the things
I say is that when
you can get to the point
where you can remove
your critical faculty at will
for selective suggestions,
that's the black belt.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
>>HOWARD: You know,
that's you want to get.
>>LISA: That's the mastery.
>>HOWARD: That's the mastery.
Milton Erickson
said to clinicians--
and he was just a magician
of change-- he said said,
your patients will
be your patients
because they're out of rapport
with their unconscious minds.
And he saw his entire job
was putting them into rapport
with themselves so that
they'd listen to themselves.
So when the captain,
the conscious mind,
gave a command to the crew, the
crew would say, argh, captain,
I'm with you.
Instead of the captain giving
a command and having the 95%
go everywhere but, which
is an unconscious mutiny.
>>LISA: Mutiny.
>>HOWARD: Exactly.
And that's what we
get in our own lives
all the time, in our
relationships, in our health,
with ourselves.
>>LISA: Wow.
So who wants to be like that?
Let's get some rapport
going with ourselves.
>>HOWARD: Let's get
some rapport going
with the unconscious
mind, but that's a process
and it's a process as
a teaching process.
>>LISA: And so, you
teach people how
to help people through this.
And you've taught
so many things.
I mean, you've done this
for, what, 20 years?
>>HOWARD: Past 20 years, yeah.
>>LISA: As long
as I've known you.
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
We've known each
other that long.
It's weird, yeah.
>>LISA: And so you have
taught all over the world.
You've taught transformational
classes, courses,
basis in neural linguistics.
>>HOWARD: Hypnosis, NLP.
We've built the largest NLP
training company in the world
in I'm proud to say that.
They built really
in Australia and all
over-- all over the planet.
At one time, we had three
trainers teaching seminars
at any given time in three
different places in the world.
>>LISA: Wow.
Wow.
>>HOWARD: It's been
quite the journey.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: It's been fun.
>>LISA: And then hundreds
of thousands of people
have gone through your
courses, which is wonderful,
because they've all
either been certified
in transformational
hypnosis, or in some type
of neuro-linguistic programming
or something like that.
We actually have a little
clip here of Chris teaching
one of the greatest techniques
that I love about anchoring.
This can be used in
any way in your life.
Take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-Hey, Chris Howard
here once again
and welcome back
to beautiful Bali.
Ubud, Bali, the Indonesian
rainforest jungle paradise.
I love to say that that way.
Let's see, I've
got a question here
and I've got to find it once
again because it was there.
There it is.
And the question
is, where did it go?
Ah, here we go.
I have a certain
person in my family
that really pushes
my buttons, and it
doesn't take long after seeing
them for me to get defensive
and closed off.
I want us to be
able to communicate,
but it seems
impossible sometimes.
What do you suggest to
help this relationship?
Hm.
OK, I'm going to approach the
question from this perspective
because you said this
person in your family
really pushes your
buttons and it
doesn't take you long to get
defensive and closed off.
And I think the basic underlying
structure of what you're saying
is that somebody else is
responsible for the way you
feel about anything.
Right?
Ultimately, the question
is, who's driving the bus?
You're driving the bus.
You're in charge of your
states of mind and emotion.
I know a lot of people
don't-- you know,
most of the people in the world
don't look at it that way.
They think that their
states of mind and emotion
are determined by the
weather, determined
by the economy, the economic
times, is the thing up,
is it down?
You know, what's
happening outside of them.
And none of those
things are responsible
for your emotional state.
Ultimately, it's you.
If your emotions are
hinged on externals,
then you're in for an emotional
roller coaster ride of a life.
The only way to take charge
of your experience of life
and make sure that you're
having the grandest expression
of a life possible, is to take
charge of your own emotions,
is to take responsibility
for your own emotions.
And there's lots of
different techniques
that we teach
throughout the trainings
that we have at Rock
House for taking
charge of your emotional states.
One very simple technique would
be an anchoring technique.
You've heard of anchoring
before based on Pavlov's work.
When Ivan Pavlov
would feed his dogs,
he'd sound a tuning
fork simultaneously.
Wasn't actually a bell.
But he'd sound that tuning fork
and the dogs would salivate.
They'd be in this
intense emotional state.
And so pretty soon, he'd sound
that tuning fork every time
and because they were--
and here's the keys,
this is what I want you
to remember from this.
Because the dogs were in an
intense-- the word is intense--
emotional state and
simultaneously there
was a unique stimulus, the two
became neurologically linked.
Became linked in the
dog's nervous system.
So pretty soon, all
he had to do was
sound the tuning fork and
the dogs would salivate.
So am I saying that you're
going to sound a tuning fork
and your family member's
going to start salivating?
No.
This is about you and
this is about your state.
So the question is what
are some triggers, right?
In the case of the dogs, the
trigger was the tuning fork.
What are some triggers that
you can set for yourself that
will cause you to remember
intense states that are more
empowering states for you?
What's a state that you want
to be in in relationship
to this family member?
Is it a state of compassion?
Perhaps.
Is it a state of understanding,
and I don't know what it is.
It's like it's going
to be different
depending upon the
situation, the individual,
so you're the one that has
to decide these things.
But what are the
states that you really
want to bring into
that situation?
I think that most people go
through life getting whatever
they get emotionally,
and they're
at the whim of everything
else that happens to them.
Right?
Now what I'm suggesting
is rather than
do that, you go into
situations by design.
That you go into these
situations and you think, OK,
what are the emotional
states that I'm
going to bring into
this situation?
Now one thing to remember is
that when you are in any given
situation, in interpersonal
communication the person
who's most committed
to their state
will end up drawing the
other person into that state.
So if this family
member is more committed
to whatever emotional state
they're in, whether it be--
and I don't know what they're
doing to push your buttons,
so you say, but maybe
they're irritated
or they're agitated in some way.
Well, if they're more
committed to that
than you are to the states that
you're going to go in with,
like a state of compassion
or a state of love.
If they're more
committed to their state,
they're going to
pull you in, right?
If you're committed more to
your state, on the other hand,
you're going to
pull them in, right?
So that's the key
is first deciding
what emotional
states do you want
to be in when you go
into that situation?
Write down three or four
different empowering states.
And then when I say come
up with some triggers that
can trigger those states off,
maybe what you want to do
is just reconditioning
the old triggers.
That's a good way to go.
So you can do this through
visual guided imagery, right?
Now it's a complex process.
We teach all sorts of
different ways to do this.
I'm going to give you the
down and dirty quick way
to reprogram or recondition
those anchors that you
have that fire off.
So one way would
be, first of all, we
need to collect those
emotional states.
So whatever emotional
states you write down,
let's say it's compassion, it's
love, and it's understanding.
Then I want you to write
down three or four events
in your past for
each one of those
where you felt those
emotional states.
So write down three or
four events from your past
for each one of those where you
felt those emotional states.
Step one, identify the states.
Step two, write down three
or four events from your past
where you felt those states.
Step three, go back into those
incidents, like in your mind,
it's a journey of consciousness.
But all of your problems
are problems of imagination,
and all of your solutions
are solutions of imagination.
So you're going to
go back and you're
going to step into your
body so you're right
inside those events, so you're
looking through your own eyes,
hearing what you
heard at the time
and feeling those feelings.
And you're going to
collect those states
and you're going to begin to
practice feeling those states.
We have a technique
that's called
stacking that we teach also
in some of our trainings,
where you can go back and you
can stack one of those states
on top of another
so you could be feeling
three or four those states.
So you could be
feeling compassionate
and loving at the same time.
And you're feeling
healthily detached,
might be a good state to
bring in there, too, right?
So where you're feeling
all of those things, right?
So you can stack those.
The way that you do it
is you feel one state,
you go into another
event with another state
and then you just imagine
stacking that state
on top of the first one.
And then you can do the same
thing with the third one.
And you'll get better
at layering these states
like that.
Once you've done all
of that, then you
can come back to
the here and now
and then just do guided imagery
and do visual rehearsal.
Imagine yourself going into
situations with this person
where they do whatever they
did that fired off those-- that
pushed those buttons, right,
where they did whatever they
did, but instead imagine
going into those situations
with these emotional states.
And notice how easy
it is and how it flows
and how you go through it.
And, you know, the
world around us
is nothing but a projection
of our consciousness.
It's been said that
people in our lives
can't behave in any way
in relationship with us
other than the way we
project them to behave.
Dr. Phil says we teach people
how to treat us, right?
So the way that you
show up absolutely
can and will change the
behaviors of the people
around you.
You just got to be committed
to it and go into it.
So create it with design.
And remember, if you need
any help with anything that's
going on, always feel
free to reach out
to our support at
support@rockhouseglobal.com.
And until next time, love
deeply, shine brightly,
make every day an
extraordinary adventure.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK ENDS]
>>LISA: So where was that shot?
>>HOWARD: That was in Bali.
>>LISA: Beautiful Bali.
That's beautiful.
How did you wind up there?
>>HOWARD: One of the most
beautiful places on the planet.
>>LISA: Is it one
of your favorites?
>>HOWARD: Oh, it absolutely is.
Like I tell people, it's the
heart of the soul of the world.
It's just a magical place.
>>LISA: Nice.
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
Absolutely.
How did I-- that's
an interesting story.
But we built a large
training organization.
We'd done $100 million
in global sales
and we were doing seminars
all over the planet.
And I was in two different time
zones every week and flying.
We had 6,000 people
the first time
we went to London and 2,000
or 3,000 people every weekend
kept flooding in to
learn this stuff,
because it is powerful
transformational technology.
>>LISA: It works.
>>HOWARD: And I think that
there's a wave that's sweeping
around the planet right now of
more and more people waking up
to the whole mind-body
connection and the--
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
>>HOWARD: -quantum
mechanical nature
of the human being in reality.
And that comes down
to subjectivity,
that life is subjective.
In quantum physics
they say the atom
doesn't exist as anything
other than a probability
until you look for it to exist.
And in looking for it to exist,
you bring it into existence.
So our world is subjective.
That means that when
we change ourselves,
when we change the observer, we
change that which is observed.
We change the world around us.
So people are flooding in.
So we had so many
people flooding in
that I was teaching
programs all over the place
and I did too much.
I couldn't do it.
>>LISA: Yeah.
That makes sense.
>>HOWARD: At the end, it became
like "Weekend at Bernie's,"
where they were wheeling
me out on the stage.
And I was like, I can't do this.
Please, stop, right?
>>LISA: Yeah.
I wonder how Tony
Robbins and those guys
put on that kind of a pace.
Yeah.
>>HOWARD: It's tough.
>>LISA: It's a lot.
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
And you know what?
And people like Tony is a
magician of change as well.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: And he comes
from an LP background.
And the thing is that I
think Tony is probably
a lot like myself
in this regard.
That I can't imagine giving
less than 100% to the people
that I'm with.
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOWARD: I just
can't imagine it.
>>LISA: I know that
about you, yes.
>>HOWARD: I pour 100%
of myself into it.
So the schedule got to be very
intense and a lot of players
involved in this stuff.
And finally I popped,
I'm like you know what?
Even though I love
what I do-- and I do.
I still love what I do, I
love doing this with you,
I love being with the
audiences and stuff,
but I needed time out!
Time out!
>>LISA: Yes, you need to
practice what you preach.
Yeah.
>>HOWARD: I remember
a couple years
before, I was sitting with
Richard Branson on Necker
Island, as you do, right?
>>LISA: Oh, right.
>>HOWARD: As you do.
>>LISA: Nope, haven't done that.
>>HOWARD: But I
just got fortunate.
I was out there, he was
there at the same time
and we had a conversation.
And I said, how do
you handle the stress?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HOWARD: And he said something
really interesting to me.
He said, you know what?
He says, I have no stress.
Now when I heard him say
that, I couldn't hear him.
>>LISA: Uh-uh.
>>HOWARD: Because we each have
our unique model of the world
and mine had stress in it.
His, according to him, didn't.
So I couldn't hear him, nor
did I believe it at the time.
I was like, come on,
talk to me about this.
He said, well, first
of all I work out,
and he said, and that helps.
And he said, but
secondly, there's
nothing that could happen
to me in business that's
worth worrying about,
which tells you something
about his values,
tells you something
about what's really important.
He said, if there
was something that
was to happen to either
my health or the health
of somebody in my family,
that would be a problem.
But there's nothing that could
happen to me in business.
And I know you had
direct experiences
with things like that.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>HOWARD: He said,
there's nothing
that could happen
to me in business
that's worth worrying about.
He said, if the
Virgin companies were
to fall out from
underneath me today,
I go move to Bali or something.
>>LISA: So you went to Bali.
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
The funny thing is, I
had been seeing pictures
from Bali, because I used to
work in Club Med in the hotel
resort industry and I saw
pictures of this paradise.
You know, like--
>>LISA: Of course, the
huts and everything.
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
They have a resort out
there and I had always
wanted to go anyway and
I heard him say that.
And then I got to this point
where I just desperately needed
a break, and I had
a hostile takeover
with my business partner.
All sorts of weird stuff
happened with the company.
It was like, OK, I'm stepping
out and I packed my bags
and I went to Bali.
And I grew my hair long.
You know, all my
shots everywhere
you see short hair on
the book, and it's like,
I grew my hair long-- the
jury's still out on it,
but I grew it long and
I'm riding my motorcycle
through the rainforests and
just connecting, just being.
>>LISA: Letting go.
Not caring.
>>HOWARD: Letting go.
Yeah.
And you really do realize
what's really important.
You know, it's like
Walt Disney said,
we don't make movies
to make money,
we make money to make movies.
>>LISA: So what's
really important?
>>HOWARD: Well, for me, like--
and, you ask me tomorrow,
ask me in another 100 years.
It changes from time to time.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HOWARD: But I think
for each of us--
Viktor Frankl wrote his book
"Man's Search For Meaning"
and he said we're all looking
to have meaning in our life,
and we need to have-- you know,
people that live in states
of chronic depression and
things like that is oftentimes
because they don't
have a greater
meaning to their
experience of life.
>>LISA: Right
>>HOWARD: And for me,
up until that time,
my meaning was the mission.
Pursuing the mission and
making a global difference,
and then eradicating
poverty on a larger level.
So I felt like I was
on this big mission.
But I poured so much of
myself into that mission
that I was like a shooting star.
So it was like when I
got back out to Bali,
I got to discover myself and
my relationship with myself.
And then it was like-- OK,
so I went through this phase
where I was like, OK, I'm
what's really important.
You know, it's like--
>>LISA: Very good, yes.
>>HOWARD: Yeah, it's
like-- because nothing
exists without me because who
knows what happens when we go.
So all I wanted to do was
enjoy myself and just have fun.
But then there was this
burning inside of me
again to get back out and it's
like, OK, I'm going to do this
but I'm going to do
it in a different way.
And I'm going to do it in
respecting myself and taking
care of myself along
the way, not being
a martyr for the cause,
but building in a way.
And I think that's--
it's maturing.
It's--
>>LISA: You're a personal
development story
within a personal
development story.
That's what you are.
[LAUGHTER]
>>HOWARD: Thank God, you know.
>>LISA: It's great.
>>HOWARD: Yeah.
And people have been
telling me that lately.
They're coming up to me like,
oh my God, to watch the grace
and elegance that you
came through this with.
If only they knew behind
closed doors, right?
>>LISA: Well, you were just
recently doing another class
here in Los Angeles and we
have another video clip.
And tell us a little
bit about what this is?
>>HOWARD: So this is actually
a pain control demonstration
that I did just
this past weekend.
And in this, I use
a rapid induction,
which looks actually very harsh.
It looks like I'm karate
chopping her on the neck.
But it actually goes-- so
it's a rapid induction that
takes her very, very
deep very quick.
But she will rate her pain
on a scale from zero to 100.
She'll have a certain
amount of pain
and then that pain
will dissipate
after we do the
induction in the process.
Now the thing is is
that with pain control,
I did that all
across North America,
taught it for years
and years and years,
and hypnosis is one
most phenomenal methods
that I've ever seen
for pain control.
>>LISA: That's beautiful
because there are so
many people in pain,
especially back pain.
So let's take a
look at this clip.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-And you're going to
push down on my hand.
And as you push down
on my hand, you're
going to push as hard
as you can and I'm
going to count from
one to whatever.
And I want you to double the
pressure with every count.
Are you ready?
Now while you're
pushing with your hand,
I want your eyes
to look up here.
Bring your eyes up here, OK?
So go ahead and begin to
push down as hard as you can.
Hard, hard, one.
Double, two.
Double, three.
Double, good, four.
Double it.
Close your eyes.
Four, double it.
Five, double it.
And sleep, sleep, sleep,
sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep.
That's right.
All the way down.
I want you to find
yourself right now
walking in a wondrous
winter wonderland.
It's cold outside, so you can
see your breath in the air.
That's right.
As you're walking in this
wondrous winter wonderland,
you can feel the snow
collapse beneath your feet.
You're walking through this
wondrous winter wonderland.
Your breath is there.
You're bundled up nice
and warm so it feels good.
If that right hand was
completely anesthetized now,
what's the color of that
anesthesia in that right hand?
Imagine if it had a color.
Imagine if it made a sound.
And imagine a feeling
of anesthesia.
And I want you to begin to
flow a river of anesthesia
from your right hand all the way
up your right arm, all the way
over to your back to that area
where you require healing.
Allowing the river of
anesthesia to continue
to flow to your back to that
area where you require healing.
Your lower back, all the
way down through the leg,
wherever it is that
you require healing.
Imagine the color and
the sound and the feeling
of anesthesia flowing down
to that area, saturating it.
You'll find it easy to
respond while remaining deeply
in trance, on a scale
from zero to 100
right now, where are you now?
-40.
Perfect.
That's the perfect number.
I want you to continue to
flow that river of anesthesia.
It's faster than a Tylenol.
Continue to flow that
river of anesthesia
from the right hand
down to that area,
completely
anesthetizing that area.
Imagining the color, the
sound, and the feeling
of that anesthesia
down there in those--
wherever it is that
you require healing.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK ENDS]
>>LISA: That was
absolutely magnificent.
People were talking
about that all weekend,
so it's very powerful process.
And did you check back
in with her the next day?
>>HOWARD: We did.
So the pain had
gone down even more.
Like I think she was
at a two the next day,
and she had been
at an 80 before.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>HOWARD: Yeah, but
that's not uncommon.
I mean, I would get that all the
time where people I would work
pain control with them and
years later they'd come up to me
and say, you know, I never
had pain again in my body.
>>LISA: It carries
over that long?
>>HOWARD: Not every time.
Sometimes it becomes more of
a thing of pain management.
It just depends.
But it's just one example
of what we're capable of.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: And I think that's
the real important message here,
is not that we can put
somebody in a rapid trance
so they can get
rid of their pain.
But if they can do that,
what else can they do?
>>LISA: Yes.
What else?
>>HOWARD: What else
are we capable of?
People play small in life.
We're capable of so much
more than we give ourselves
credit for.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOWARD: And when
we learn how to tap
into the power of
100% of who we are,
we can live the lives that
we're really meant to live.
We can live the highest
expression of a life
that we possibly
could live, and that's
why this stuff has been so cool.
>>LISA: Shows the beautiful
power of our minds.
Thank you so much, Chris
Howard, for joining me.
>>HOWARD: Thank you.
>>LISA: I so appreciate it.
If you would like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Chris Howard, you
could go to Giaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[THEME MUSIC]